Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the ensuing global energy crisis have emerged as a leading foreign policy priorities for Britain’s new prime minister Liz Truss, as she and her US counterpart Joe Biden promised to strengthen their relationship in face of Vladimir Putin’s aggression.

Truss’s call to Biden on Tuesday night followed a conversation with Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskiy, and focused on what she called “the extreme economic problems caused by Putin’s war”. Biden and Truss “reinforced their commitment to strengthening global liberty, tackling the risks posed by autocracies and ensuring Putin fails in Ukraine”, according to Downing Street.

No 10 noted the “enduring strength of the special relationship” with the US, something that appeared at times strained during the reign of her predecessor Boris Johnson.

Liz Truss and her husband on the steps of No 10
Liz Truss culls cabinet on first day as loyalists and allies get top jobs
Read more
The leaders also committed to deepening alliances through Nato and the Aukus defence pact, established to counter China’s dominance in the Indo-Pacific region.

The White House said the leaders discussed close cooperation to help Ukraine “defend itself against Russian aggression”, as well as the challenges posed by China, Iran’s ambitions to acquire nuclear weapons, securing sustainable and affordable energy and the need to protect the Good Friday Agreement.

Truss’s first call to a foreign leader was to Zelenskiy. The prime minister, who is the UK’s fourth Conservative prime minister in six years, told him “Ukraine could depend on the UK’s assistance for the long term” and deplored Putin’s attempts to weaponise energy. Accepting an invitation to visit Ukraine soon, the new prime minister said it was “vital Russia’s blackmail did not deter the west from ensuring Putin fails”, according to Downing Street.

Honoured to be the object of Truss’s first call, Zelenskiy hailed what he said would be a “profound and productive relationship” with the new leader, with whom he discussed how to increase the pressure on Russia and raise the costs of its invasion.

“It is very important that Great Britain retains a leadership role in consolidating the free world and protecting freedom,” he said.

Liz Truss must hold to the legally binding target to reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050, parliamentarians from all of the UK’s major parties have urged in a letter to the incoming prime minister.

Truss has pledged to keep the target, but her campaign promises to expand oil and gas production in the North Sea, voices support for fracking, and her opposition to onshore wind and solar farms have led to fears that she could renege on actions needed to meet the target.

Her appointment of Jacob Rees-Mogg, the former minister for Brexit opportunities, as secretary of state for business, energy and industrial strategy has also raised concerns among climate campaigners and energy experts.

Rees-Mogg has cast doubt on the need to tackle the climate crisis in the past, and has vowed to “squeeze every last cubic inch of gas from the North Sea”. He also supports fracking, while opposing onshore wind power generation.

The group of 29 MPs and peers from the all-party parliamentary group on the environment have written to Truss asking her to recommit to net zero and push forward with measures that would reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and help to bring down soaring energy bills.

“The decisions your government takes will have a noticeable impact on the lives of people across the country and indeed our entire planet,” they wrote, in a letter seen by the Guardian. “We hope that as prime minister you will continue to support measures to reach net zero by 2050 or sooner in this country, whilst also being a global champion for climate and nature on the international stage.”

They call for her to recommit to net zero, and to “getting the UK on track to meet its legally binding carbon budgets”; to boost renewable energy; to put in place a national scheme for home insulation; and to reaffirm the government’s goals on conserving wildlife and the natural environment.

Chris Skidmore, the Tory former energy minister who is chair of the APPG, and coordinated the letter, told the Guardian he was “not worried” that Truss would row back on commitments to reduce carbon emissions.

“The government is pro net zero, and the prime minister has said she wants to double down on net zero, in a more business-friendly and private enterprise way,” he said. “I’m absolutely determined for people to see net zero as a mainstream economic issue, a huge opportunity for job creation and levelling up. It’s very important that net zero is not seen as a culture war, left-wing project – it’s actually an economic growth strategy.”

Skidmore is thought to have turned down a potential job as energy minister under Rees-Mogg for personal reasons. Rees-Mogg is expected to oversee the energy portfolio himself, rather than appointing a junior to the role.

Skidmore said the business secretary would be bound by the collective responsibility of the cabinet, and be ruled by Truss in policy, regardless of any other views on the climate crisis. “The direction is set from the top. I’m sure whoever is secretary of state will abide by collective responsibility, and the prime minister sees net zero as an opportunity to deliver economic growth,” he said.

Ben Goldsmith, a prominent green Tory, investor and chair of the Conservative Environment Network, told the Guardian that Rees-Mogg had “not yet sought to make a name for himself as a campaigner for protecting the natural world”.

After two years of wrangling, false starts and disappointments, it finally happened: America has passed its first-ever climate legislation, moving the country closer to its goal of a decarbonized future and taking a significant step toward helping the planet avert the worst scenarios of climate catastrophe.

But it’s not a time to rest. We have always held power to account – on climate and  every other major issue – from the fossil fuel companies responsible for heating the planet to the politicians representing their interests. The country responsible for the most greenhouse gas emissions in history has indicated it will change course; we will relentlessly report on what comes next, who will benefit and the remaining obstacles to progress. 

With daily reporting and analysis on the climate emergency, we aim to ensure that even more people are made aware of the dangers – and opportunities – of this moment.

Our editorial independence means we are free to write and publish journalism which prioritises the crisis. We can highlight the climate policy successes and failings of those who lead us in these challenging times. We have no shareholders and no billionaire owner, just the determination and passion to deliver high-impact global reporting, free from commercial or political influence.

And we provide all this for free, for everyone to read. We do this because we believe in information equality. Greater numbers of people can keep track of the global events shaping our world, understand their impact on people and communities, and become inspired to take meaningful action. Millions can benefit from open access to quality, truthful news, regardless of their ability to pay for it. 

Squeezing “every last cubic inch of gas” from the North Sea, re-starting fracking, rejecting windfarms in favour of fossil fuels – the policies espoused by Jacob Rees-Mogg, against a backdrop of rising energy prices, form a clear indication of how the new business secretary will view his brief.

Rees-Mogg will be the core cabinet member as secretary of state for business and energy, with responsibility for meeting the UK’s legally binding target of net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. It is a goal he has previously described as “a long way off” and “a huge regulatory cost”.

Late on Tuesday night No 10 announced that Graham Stuart would become minister for climate change and be attending cabinet, prompting speculation that Downing Street had succumbed to concerns of green Tories about giving the role to Rees-Mogg as originally planned.

He claimed: “If you read the IPCC report on [the climate emergency] it said that if you were to take action now to try and stop man-made global warming, it would have no effect for hundreds or possibly a thousand years. I’m all in favour of long-term policymaking but I think that trying to forecast the climate for a thousand years, and what little steps you make now having the ability to change it, is unrealistic. And I think the cost of it is probably unaffordable.”

In fact, the IPCC found that efforts to stop burning fossil fuels now were essential, and failure to do so would have an impact lasting thousands of years.

Rees-Mogg, an Old Etonian, has been an MP for 12 years and has been a prominent Brexiter, leader of the House of Commons and most recently minister for Brexit opportunities. Though he has voted broadly with the Conservative government on issues outside Brexit, his voting record shows little inclination to champion green policies such as net zero, and a zeal for post-Brexit deregulation that campaigners fear will be carried over.

Rebecca Newsom, head of politics at Greenpeace UK, said: “Rees-Mogg is the last person who should be in charge of the energy brief, at the worst possible moment. He blamed ‘climate alarmism’ for high energy bills, pushing David Cameron to ‘cut the green crap’ like incentives for solar, wind and energy efficiency, which has added £150 to every energy bill. Appointing him to the brief now suggests the Tories have learned nothing from years of energy policy incompetence.”

He takes the brief at a time of unprecedented crisis for the UK’s energy industry, and for bill-payers, both domestic and in business. Millions of people are likely to struggle to pay their heating bills this winter, and even the price cap proposed by the prime minister, Liz Truss, will leave many households choosing between heating and eating. Small businesses are facing ruin without government help. The UK is also badly off-track to meet its net zero commitments, despite strong evidence that action to meet them would also bring down bills.

The UK stands in need of vital energy investment, in renewables and low-carbon infrastructure. Green businesses and investors may find having a green energy sceptic as the cabinet minister in charge does not inspire confidence.

Dave Timms, head of political affairs at Friends of the Earth, said: “Extracting more fossil fuels is a false solution to the energy crisis. It’s our failure to end our reliance on gas and oil that’s sent energy bills soaring and left us teetering on the brink of catastrophic climate change. We need a forward-looking, modern energy strategy based on better home insulation and unleashing the full potential of the UK’s homegrown renewables power – not one rooted in dirty fossil fuels of the past.”

Rees-Mogg’s most recent predecessor offers a different example. Kwasi Kwarteng, now chancellor of the exchequer under Truss, took office under Boris Johnson as a confirmed de-regulator, one of the authors of the Britannia Unchained pamphlet that advocated a radical free market. But close associates say he changed his mind while in office, earlier this year taking a strong stance in favour of renewables as a solution to the Ukraine-related rise in energy prices.

“I heard Kwarteng say that all his instincts were free market, but the more he understood of energy policy, the more he understood the need for intervention,” said Shaun Spiers, executive director of the Green Alliance thinktank. “Hopefully Rees-Mogg could go the same way. But nothing about him shows any particular willingness to listen, or to change his mind.”

The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette’s editorial board said that Pennsylvania Senate Republican nominee Mehmet Oz has raised “legitimate concerns” about his Democratic opponent, Lt. Gov. John Fetterman, in an editorial published Tuesday. 

The editorial comes a week after Fetterman announced that he would not participate in a debate with Oz during the first week of September, citing his recovery from a stroke he had in May and statements from Oz’s campaign that Fetterman has said mocked him for having the stroke. 

“If Mr. Fetterman is not well enough to debate his opponent, that raises serious concerns about his ability to serve as a United States senator,” the editorial states. 

Fetterman told the Post-Gazette in July that he felt “really good” following the stroke and has no “physical limits.” 

The editorial states Fetterman’s campaign has acknowledged lingering struggles with speech but asserts that he will fully recover and is taking the necessary steps to do so in speech therapy. It states that a live debate is the best way to determine if Fetterman is up to the job of senator. 

The editorial board endorsed former President Trump for reelection in 2020, its first time endorsing a Republican for president since 1972. Trump endorsed Oz’s campaign in the spring.

The board said the legitimate point about Fetterman’s health does not excuse the tactics that Oz’s campaign has pursued in deciding that Oz will benefit from “dragging the race deeper and deeper into the muck.” 

Fetterman’s stroke –– which he had in May shortly before winning the Democratic primary –– gained additional attention in the general election campaign after an Oz spokesperson said in a statement to Insider that Fetterman may not have had a stroke if he “had ever eaten a vegetable in his life.” 

Oz’s senior communications adviser made the statement in response to criticism Oz received for a campaign video in which he complained about rising grocery prices making crudité more expensive. His campaign later released a mocking statement in which it noted “concessions” that it would make if Fetterman agreed to a debate, like paying for “additional medical personnel” that Fetterman might need “on standby.” 

Fetterman said Oz has made “abundantly clear that they think it is funny to mock a stroke survivor” and that he would be ready to discuss debating Oz when Oz and his team “are ready to take this seriously.” 

The Post-Gazette said Oz has attempted to distance himself from his campaign’s statements but that spokespeople speak for his campaign and he should fire them if they have “gone rogue.” But the editorial said he can note legitimate concerns about Fetterman being straightforward with his health without “sandbox bullying.”

When FBI agents searched Donald Trump’s residence at Mar-a-Lago in early August, they had ample reason, backed by a valid search warrant, to believe they’d find something. And find something they did: roughly 13,000 items, including classified documents.

The circumstances here are extraordinary: a former president who appears to have illegally removed classified material from the White House and then resisted repeated requests to return them. But now instead of moving forward in reviewing those documents and just how they got to the Florida residence, the investigation has been largely stalled thanks to another extraordinary circumstance: a Trump appointed-federal judge granted his request and ordered the appointment of a special master to review the documents seized from Mar-a-Lago.

There’s a lot that’s unusual about the decision and most of it warrants serious pause.

When there are questions of attorney-client privilege or other concerns about what evidence should be shared with whom, a judge can certainly order the services of a special master to help make those determinations. In this case, though, the DOJ already did its own screening with a separate group of FBI agents and prosecutors, according to the Washington Post. That team found roughly 500 potentially privileged items, per the judge’s decision.

What’s more, the special master approved by Judge Aileen M. Cannon wouldn’t just be looking for information subject to attorney-client privilege, but

to executive privilege as well. Invoking executive privilege is certainly much rarer. Though Cannon argued that concerns about executive privilege should not be “disregarded,” other legal experts are not so sure that a unilateral declaration from a former president holds up, according to reporting by the New York Times. Experts have also questioned the judge’s decision to apply it in this case, noting that Trump is no longer in office and arguing that the DOJ is itself part of the executive branch .

“The opinion seems oblivious to the nature of executive privilege,” Peter M. Shane, a legal scholar at New York University, told the New York Times.

Then there’s the matter of the material itself that includes — let’s not forget — the most top secret designation possible and that likely involves information related to national security. This means that, as the DOJ has argued, anyone assigned to review the evidence would need top security clearance.

The specialness of the case was not lost on Cannon who used the former president’s unique position to argue that he was at a heightened risk for “stigma” and reputational harm. This is a risk that most everyone faces if they’re being investigated and we’d imagine it’s especially true for people being investigated for potentially exposing national security secrets. That’s pretty serious after all.

Cannon actually agreed with the government that Trump does not seem to have suffered any violation of his constitutional rights and still this decision seems to grant the perpetually aggrieved former president privilege after privilege.

Part of Cannon’s argument in favor of a special master is the “appearance of fairness.” That is important and it’s a concern the DOJ seems to have weighed in its careful execution of the investigation so far. But it’s a peculiar concern coming from Cannon who, before even hearing arguments, indicated she was likely to find in Trump’s favor.

Now that she has, investigators are not able to examine or use any of the seized items. They’ll still be able to conduct interviews relevant to the investigation. And a separate review of the material by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence can continue. The ruling will likely be appealed but promises to slow the investigation regardless.

This decision represents the “radical path,” as New York University law professor Ryan Goodman told the Times. And it’s a troubling reminder that the courts are not free from political influence. Trump was a prolific appointer in his four years, appointing “more than 200 judges to the federal bench,” according to Pew Research Center, effectively reshaping the federal judiciary, “particularly the appeals courts — for decades to come.” The appeals court that would hear the case if it’s appealed has six Trump appointees out of the total 11 active judges.

The delay is unfortunate but the bigger concern here is the fair application of the law. As loud and whiny as Trump has been about his so-called persecution, the investigation is a serious one and has not infringed on his rights.

Trump seems to think rules don’t apply to him but if there’s any place they should, it’s in a court of law.